>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 21: A
DEAL THAT WOULD END A LENGTHY
LABOR DISPUTE AT DOZENS OF WEST
COAST PORTS; PRO-WESTERN FORCES
PREPARE FOR A MAJOR OFFENSIVE
AGAINST ISIS IN IRAQ-- WE'LL
HEAR FROM AN EXPERT JUST BACK
FROM THAT COUNTRY; AND IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, A BATTLE OVER
BOOKS-- FRENCH RETAILERS TAKE ON
AMAZON.
>> (translated): IF YOU WANT
TO BUY A BOOK FROM SOMEONE WHO
CONTRIBUTES TO THE ECONOMY OF
ITS COUNTRY, THEN YOU SHOULD BUY
IT FROM SOMEONE WHO PAYS ITS
TAXES IN FRANCE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
NEGOTIATORS HAVE REACHED A DEAL,
ENDING A LONG-RUNNING, COSTLY
LABOR DISPUTE THAT SLOWED THE
SHIPMENT OF GOODS INTO AND OUT
OF DOZENS OF PORTS ON THE WEST
COAST.
THE TENTATIVE AGREEMENT BETWEEN
SHIPPING COMPANIES AND UNIONS
REPRESENTING THOUSANDS OF
LONGSHOREMAN WAS BROKERED BY
U.S. LABOR SECRETARY THOMAS
PEREZ.
THE WHITE HOUSE CALLED THE
AGREEMENT "A HUGE RELIEF."
THE LONGSHOREMEN AND SHIPPERS
HAD BEEN FEUDING FOR MANY
MONTHS.
DURING THAT TIME, THE LOADING
AND UNLOADING OF SHIPMENTS TO
AND FROM THE UNITED STATES HAD
SLOWED AT 29 PORTS UP AND DOWN
THE PACIFIC COAST.
THOSE PORTS HANDLE AN ESTIMATED
50% OF U.S. MARITIME TRADE AND
MORE THAN 70% OF U.S. IMPORTS
FROM ASIA.
BY SOME ESTIMATES, EXPORT LOSSES
TO FARMERS WERE THOUGHT TO BE
RUNNING HUNDREDS OF MILLION OF
DOLLARS A WEEK.
A STORM SYSTEM THAT BROUGHT SNOW
TO THE ROCKIES AND MIDWEST
CAUSED DANGEROUS ICING IN
PORTIONS OF THE SOUTH.
THE STORM HAS NOW MOVED EAST,
AFFECTING MAJOR CITIES ALONG THE
I-95 CORRIDOR, INCLUDING ALREADY
HARD-HIT BOSTON, WHICH IS
EXPECTED TO GET FIVE MORE INCHES
OF SNOW.
LOST IN ALL OF THE COVERAGE OF
THE COLD WEATHER IS WORD FROM
THE NATIONAL CLIMATIC DATA
CENTER THAT CALIFORNIA IS HAVING
ITS WARMEST WINTER IN AT LEAST
120 YEARS.
IT WAS ALSO THE DROUGHT-STRICKEN
STATE'S FOURTH DRIEST JANUARY ON
RECORD.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS
IMPOSED A FINE OF $14,000 A DAY
ON A JAPANESE AIRBAG
MANUFACTURER FOR FAILING TO
COOPERATE WITH A SAFETY
INVESTIGATION.
THE FINE WAS LEVIED AGAINST
TAKATA YESTERDAY FOR WHAT THE
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY
ADMINISTRATION CALLS THE
COMPANY'S FAILURE TO RESPOND
FULLY OR TRUTHFULLY TO
GOVERNMENT INQUIRIES.
THE COMPANY DENIES THE CHARGES.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS TAKATA
AIRBAGS CAN EXPLODE VIOLENTLY
WHEN THEY DEPLOY, SPRAYING METAL
FRAGMENTS.
MORE THAN 18 MILLION VEHICLES
WITH THE FAULTY AIRBAGS HAVE
BEEN RECALLED IN THE UNITED
STATES.
TWO AMERICAN ASTRONAUTS VENTURED
OUTSIDE THE INTERNATIONAL SPACE
STATION TODAY FOR MORE THAN SIX
AND A HALF HOURS, THE FIRST OF
THREE SCHEDULED SPACE WALKS IN
EIGHT DAYS.
THEY'RE INSTALLING CABLE SO THAT
COMMERCIAL SPACECRAFT CAN DOCK
THERE TWO YEARS FROM NOW.
DURING AN UNANNOUNCED VISIT TO
AFGHANISTAN TODAY, THE NATION'S
NEW DEFENSE SECRETARY, ASHTON
CARTER, MET WITH AFGHAN
PRESIDENT ASHRAF GHANI AND THEN
TOLD REPORTERS THE UNITED STATES
MIGHT KEEP AMERICAN TROOPS THERE
LONGER THAN HAD BEEN PLANNED.
>> PRESIDENT OBAMA IS
CONSIDERING A NUMBER OF OPTIONS
TO REINFORCE OUR SUPPORT FOR
PRESIDENT GHANI'S SECURITY
STRATEGY, INCLUDING POSSIBLE
CHANGES TO THE TIMELINE FOR OUR
DRAWDOWN OF U.S. TROOPS.
THAT COULD MEAN TAKING ANOTHER
LOOK AT THE TIMING AND
SEQUENCING OF BASE CLOSURES TO
ENSURE WE HAVE THE RIGHT ARRAY
OF COALITION CAPABILITIES TO
SUPPORT OUR AFGHAN PARTNERS.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT OBAMA
HAD SAID THE NUMBER OF AMERICAN
TROOPS SERVING THERE WOULD BE
CUT FROM 10,000 TO 5,000 BY THE
END OF THIS YEAR, AND THEN TO
NEAR ZERO BY THE END OF 2016.
AFTER A MEETING TODAY IN LONDON
WITH THE BRITISH FOREIGN
SECRETARY, SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY SAID THE UNITED
STATES AND UNITED KINGDOM ARE
WEIGHING NEW SANCTIONS AGAINST
RUSSIA FOR ITS ROLE IN THE
LATEST ROUND OF FIGHTING BETWEEN
PRO-MOSCOW REBELS AND THE
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT.
>> WE KNOW TO A CERTAINTY WHAT
RUSSIA HAS BEEN PROVIDING TO THE
SEPARATISTS, AND THE WAYS IN
WHICH RUSSIA HAS CYNICALLY BEEN
WILLING TO GO TO, EVEN LEAD AN
EFFORT AT THE U.N., EVEN
SIMULTANEOUSLY AS IT IS
CONTINUING TO DO LAND-GRABBING
IN UKRAINE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE REBELS DROVE
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT FORCES FROM
A KEY RAIL HUB THIS WEEK, JUST
DAYS AFTER THE LEADERS OF
RUSSIA, UKRAINE, FRANCE AND
GERMANY AGREED ON A NEW CEASE-
FIRE.
A SHOW OF SOLIDARITY WITH THE
JEWISH COMMUNITY IN OSLO,
NORWAY, TODAY.
AN ESTIMATED 1,000 PEOPLE,
INCLUDING HUNDREDS OF MUSLIMS,
FORMED WHAT THEY DESCRIBED AS A
RING OF PEACE AROUND A SYNAGOGUE
AND CHANTED, "NO TO ANTI-
SEMITISM, NO TO ISLAMOPHOBIA."
THE EVENT CAME A WEEK AFTER A
RADICALIZED MUSLIM MAN ATTACKED
A FREE SPEECH FORUM AND THEN
SHOT A MAN OUTSIDE A SYNAGOGUE
IN NEARBY DENMARK.
HE KILLED TWO PEOPLE BEFORE
BEING SHOT DEAD BY POLICE.
IN DUBAI TODAY, ONE OF THE
WORLD'S TALLEST RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS, THE MARINA TORCH, AN
86-STORY TOWER, CAUGHT FIRE,
SENDING HUNDREDS OF RESIDENTS
FLEEING TO SAFETY.
THERE WERE NO REPORTED INJURIES
OR DEATHS.
THE CAUSE OF THE BLAZE IS STILL
UNDER INVESTIGATION.
>> Sreenivasan: AT A BRIEFING
THIS WEEK, A U.S. OFFICIAL
ANNOUNCED PLANS TO TAKE BACK
IRAQ'S SECOND BIGGEST CITY,
MOSUL, FROM ISIS FIGHTERS WHO
HAD CAPTURED IT LAST JUNE.
WHAT ARE THE OPERATION'S CHANCES
FOR SUCCESS?
FOR MORE, WE ARE JOINED NOW FROM
WASHINGTON BY DOUGLAS OLLIVANT.
HE WAS A MILITARY PLANNER IN
IRAQ AND SERVED ON THE NATIONAL
SECURITY COUNCIL UNDER BOTH
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND, BEFORE
THAT, PRESIDENT BUSH.
HE'S NOW A SENIOR NATIONAL
SECURITY FELLOW AT THE NEW
AMERICA FOUNDATION AND A PARTNER
AT MANTID INTERNATIONAL.
HE WAS RECENTLY IN IRAQ.
SO, WHAT ARE THE PLANS TO TRY TO
TACKLE ISIS IN MOSUL?
>> WELL, ACCORDING TO THIS
BRIEFING-- WHICH WE CAN CUT BACK
TO IN A MINUTE-- THAT EVIDENTLY
A NUMBER OF REPORTERS GOT ON
BACKGROUND, THE PLAN IS TO SEND
ABOUT SIX OR SEVEN IRAQI
BRIGADES FORWARD ALONG WITH A
COUNTERTERRORISM BRIGADE, ALONG
WITH SOME TRIBAL FORCES, AND
HAVE THE KURDS ESSENTIALLY
ISOLATED, KEEP ANYONE FROM
EITHER FLEEING THE CITY OR
REINFORCING IT FROM THE NORTH.
ACCORDING TO THIS BRIEFING, OR
THE REPORTS FROM THIS BRIEFING,
THEY BELIEVE THERE ARE ONLY
1,000 TO 2,000 ISLAMIC STATE
FIGHTERS IN THE CITY, AND
THEREFORE THIS FORCE OF ABOUT
10,000 TO 20,000, DEPENDING ON
HOW YOU COUNT, SHOULD HAVE A
REASONABLE CHANCE OF PUSHING
THEM OUT.
AND THEY'RE TALKING ABOUT
PERHAPS DOING THIS AS EARLY AS
LATE SPRING-- APRIL, MAY.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, AND
CONSIDERING THAT THERE WERE ALL
THOSE DETAILS THAT EVEN WE ARE
TALKING ABOUT, THERE'S BEEN
PUSHBACK FROM AT LEAST SENATOR
McCAIN AND SENATOR GRAHAM,
SAYING WE JUST TELEGRAPHED OUR
PLANS TO THE ENEMY.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THERE'S A LOT OF INTERESTING
DISPUTE ABOUT WHY DID THIS
HAPPEN?
WHY WAS CENTCOM TALKING ABOUT
IT?
WHY ARE THE IRAQIS NOT TALKING
ABOUT IT, RATHER THAN THE
AMERICANS?
SENATOR GRAHAM AND SENATOR
McCAIN ARE CLEARLY A LITTLE BIT
UPSET ABOUT TIPPING OUR HAND.
AND THERE'S A LOT OF BAFFLEMENT
IN THE NATIONAL SECURITY
ESTABLISHMENT.
YOU KNOW, WAS THIS SOME MILITARY
OFFICER FREELANCING?
DID THE WHITE HOUSE WANT THIS TO
HAPPEN?
JUST EXACTLY HOW AND WHY DID
THIS HAPPEN?
OR IS THIS SOME PART OF SOME
GRAND INFORMATION PLANT, THE
"WASHINGTON POST" IS REPORTING,
TO DOWNGRADE THE MORALE OF THE
FIGHTERS IN MOSUL AND TRY TO
MAKE IT LESS OF A SPECTACULAR
BATTLE THAN IT MIGHT OTHERWISE
BE?
>> Sreenivasan: WELL, HOW
DIFFICULT IS IT TO FIGHT WITH
10,000 TO 20,000 PEOPLE AGAINST
A POPULATION OF 1,000 OR 2,000
IN A LARGE CITY, OR A CITY OF
MAYBE A MILLION, TWO MILLION
PEOPLE?
>> IT COULD BE VERY DIFFICULT.
AND HERE'S THE ISSUE WITH THE
BATTLE OF MOSUL THAT'S GOING TO
COME.
IT COULD BE SO VERY, VERY
DIFFERENT.
AGAIN, THE "WASHINGTON POST"
STORY SAYS WE WANT IT TO BE MORE
LIKE THE LIBERATION OF PARIS
THAN LIKE STALINGRAD.
AND THAT IS A DISTINCT
POSSIBILITY.
AGAIN, IF THERE'S ONLY 1,000 OR
2,000 ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS IN
MOSUL IN A POPULATION OF ONE
MILLION, IT'S ENTIRELY POSSIBLE
THAT AS THE IRAQI FORCES CLOSE
THAT THERE COULD BE A LOT OF
GUERILLAS INSIDE THE CITY WHO
ASSASSINATE KEY LEADERS, WHO
BREAK DOWN DEFENSES, WHO DESTROY
THEIR SUPPLIES, AND THAT
THEREFORE THE BATTLE OF MOSUL
IS LESS A BANG THAN A WHIMPER.
ON THE OTHER HAND, IT COULD LOOK
LIKE STALINGRAD, AND IT COULD
LOOK LIKE ANYTHING IN BETWEEN.
AND SO, IT'S JUST VERY DIFFICULT
TO KNOW EXACTLY HOW THIS BATTLE
WILL UNFOLD.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, DOES THIS
CREATE AN INCENTIVE FOR THE
DIFFERENT ISIL FACTIONS IN THE
REGION TO BAND TOGETHER AND TRY
TO DEFEND MOSUL?
OR, POSSIBLY, FOR THESE PEOPLE,
THESE 1,000 OR 2,000, TO SAY,
"HERE'S MY TICKET OUT, LET ME GO
NOW TO ISIL IN SYRIA"?
>> WELL, THAT'S A GREAT
QUESTION, AND, YOU KNOW, THAT'S
THE PROBLEM WITH WAR IS, IT'S
VERY MULTIVARIANT AND THINGS CAN
GO EITHER WAY.
SO, YOU CAN SEE EITHER OF THOSE
OUTCOMES HAPPENING.
THIS COULD WORK IN THE SENSE OF
MAKING THE FIGHTERS IN MOSUL,
PARTICULARLY AS THEY ARE
BECOMING MORE ISOLATED.
THE KURDS ARE PUTTING IN THIS
PERIMETER AROUND THE NORTH AND
NORTHWEST OF MOSUL, STARTING TO
CUT THEM OFF FROM SYRIA AND
MAKING THEM MORE ISOLATED.
AND THEY MAY START TO FEEL THAT
AND DECIDE IT'S BETTER TO LIVE
AND FIGHT ANOTHER DAY SOMEPLACE
ELSE.
ON THE OTHER HAND, IT COULD GO
THE OPPOSITE WAY, AND THEY COULD
DIG IN AND DECIDE TO FIGHT.
AND WE JUST DON'T KNOW.
THAT'S THE PROBLEM WITH WAR.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, DO WE HAVE
GREATER CONFIDENCE NOW IN THE
IRAQI FORCES THAT THEY'RE UP TO
THIS TASK?
>> WE SEEM TO.
IT SEEMS THAT THERE ARE MORE
RELIABLE UNITS THAT HAVE BEEN
PUSHED UP FROM THE SOUTH THAT
ARE GETTING EXTRA TRAINING FROM
THE AMERICAN TRAINERS WHO HAVE
BEEN IN COUNTRY FOR ABOUT SIX
MONTHS NOW, AND THAT THERE IS A
LEVEL OF CONFIDENCE THAT THESE
FORCES MAY BE READY TO DO THE
TYPE OF HARD, IN-THE-CITY
FIGHTING THAT'S REQUIRED.
OF COURSE, THERE ARE DOUBTERS.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO WOULD SAY
THAT'S NOT THE CASE.
BUT I THINK MAINSTREAM OPINION
IS THAT THEY'RE GOING TO BE
READY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DOUGLAS OLLIVANT, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: EUROPEAN UNION
REGULATORS ANNOUNCED THIS WEEK
THEY'RE DEVELOPING NEW RULES
THAT COULD FORCE BIG
MULTINATIONALS TO PAY HIGHER
TAXES IN THE COUNTRIES WHERE
THEY OPERATE, COMPANIES LIKE
AMAZON IN COUNTRIES LIKE FRANCE.
AMAZON HAS ALREADY COME UNDER
FIRE THERE BY BOOKSELLERS WHO
BELIEVE THE WAY IT SELLS BOOKS
IS THREATENING THEIR BUSINESSES
AND EVEN UNDERMINING THE FRENCH
WAY OF LIFE, CHARGES THAT DON'T
SIT ESPECIALLY WELL WITH THE
COMPANY.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
TRAVELED TO FRANCE RECENTLY AND
FILED THIS REPORT.
>> Reporter: THE FRENCH ARE
PROUD OF THEIR GREAT CULTURAL
TRADITIONS-- LINGERING AT CAFES,
CELEBRATING THEIR ARCHITECTURE
AND FINE ART.
AND THEN, THERE'S THE FRENCH
LOVE OF BOOKS.
THIS IS THE NATION OF VOLTAIRE,
VICTOR HUGO, EMILE ZOLA AND
JULES VERNE.
>> BOOKS ARE VERY IMPORTANT IN
FRANCE.
FRANCE IS A VERY OLD LITERARY
NATION.
>> Reporter: PIERRE ASSOULINE IS
A WELL-KNOWN FRENCH AUTHOR WHO'S
WRITTEN 30 BOOKS.
SO, THEY TALK ABOUT BOOKS AND
LITERATURE THE WAY WE AMERICANS
MIGHT TALK ABOUT SPORTS OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
>> ABOUT BASEBALL.
>> Reporter: ABOUT BASEBALL.
>> YES.
>> Reporter: BOOKS HAVE A
SPECIAL STATUS IN FRANCE.
A CONCEPT CALLED THE CULTURAL
EXCEPTION MEANS CUSTOMERS BUYING
BOOKS PAY THE SAME LOW SALES TAX
RATE AS THEY DO ON THINGS LIKE
FOOD AND ELECTRICITY, BECAUSE
THEY'RE ALL CONSIDERED ESSENTIAL
GOODS.
AND, IT TURNS OUT, THE FRENCH
LOVE THEIR BOOKSTORES AS MUCH AS
THEIR BOOKS.
>> READERS ARE FAITHFUL AND
LOYAL TO THE WRITER, IT'S
OBVIOUS.
BUT MAINLY TO A BOOK SELLER, TO
THE OWNER OF A BOOKSTORE.
>> Reporter: SO, IT'S PERSONAL.
IT'S A PERSONAL RELATIONSHIP.
>> YES, IT'S VERY PERSONAL.
>> Reporter: BUT NOW, SOME HERE
FEAR THE FUTURE OF FRANCE'S
2,500 OR SO BOOKSTORES MAY BE
THREATENED AS MORE AND MORE
CUSTOMERS BUY THEIR BOOKS
ONLINE.
AND THEY'RE BUYING FROM ONE
ONLINE GIANT IN PARTICULAR:
AMAZON.
AMAZON NOW ACCOUNTS FOR AROUND
10% OF ALL NEW BOOK SALES IN
FRANCE AND IS ON TRACK TO BECOME
THE BIGGEST BOOKSELLER HERE
SOON.
BUT SOME CRITICS THINK AMAZON'S
GOTTEN THERE IN PART BY NOT
PLAYING FAIRLY.
>> (translated): IT IS, I
WOULD SAY, A THUG.
IT'S A THUG, SOMEONE WHO DOESN'T
RESPECT THE LAWS IN PLACE WITHIN
A COUNTRY AND A COUNTRY'S
ECOSYSTEM.
>> Reporter: RENNY AUPETIT OWNS
A BOOKSTORE IN EASTERN PARIS.
HE SAYS HE HAS A PROBLEM WITH
THE WAY AMAZON TRIES TO MAXIMIZE
PROFITS, INCLUDING ITS
INTERPRETATION OF A LAW THAT'S
HELPED SMALL BOOKSTORES COMPETE
WITH BIG CHAINS FOR DECADES.
IN 1981, THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT
PASSED WHAT'S CALLED THE LANG
LAW, WHICH ESSENTIALLY FIXED THE
PRICE OF BOOKS.
THE PUBLISHER PRINTS THE PRICE
ON THE BACK AND NO ONE CAN SELL
IT FOR MORE THAN A 5% DISCOUNT.
SO, NO MATTER WHERE YOU GO-- TO
A SMALL INDEPENDENT STORE, A
LARGE CHAIN-- THE PRICE IS GOING
TO BE PRETTY MUCH THE SAME.
BUT WHAT THE AUTHORS OF THE LAW
DIDN'T NECESSARILY FORESEE IN
THE EARLY '80s WAS THE COMING OF
THE INTERNET AND AMAZON.
WHEN THE COMPANY LAUNCHED IN
FRANCE 15 YEARS AGO, LIKE
EVERYONE ELSE, IT COULD OFFER A
DISCOUNT OF 5%.
BUT AMAZON ALSO OFFERED FREE
SHIPPING.
THE FRENCH SAID THAT AMOUNTED TO
AN UNFAIR ADVANTAGE OVER
INDEPENDENT BOOKSTORES,
ESPECIALLY WHEN COUPLED WITH THE
CONVENIENCE OF SHOPPING FROM
HOME.
SO, THE FRENCH ASSEMBLY PASSED A
BILL IN 2013 FORBIDDING ANY
ONLINE RETAILER FROM OFFERING
BOTH A DISCOUNT AND FREE
SHIPPING.
IN AN EMAIL TO NEWSHOUR, A
REPRESENTATIVE FOR AMAZON
DECLINED COMMENT ON THE LAW.
BUT WHEN IT FIRST PASSED, THE
COMPANY WAS QUOTED IN NEWS
REPORTS SAYING: "ALL MEASURES
THAT AIM TO RAISE THE PRICE OF
BOOKS SOLD ONLINE WILL CURB THE
ABILITY OF FRENCH PEOPLE TO BUY
CULTURAL WORKS AND DISCRIMINATES
AGAINST THOSE WHO BUY ONLINE."
WHEN THE LAW WENT INTO EFFECT
LAST YEAR, AMAZON AGREED TO
CHARGE FOR SHIPPING, SORT OF.
IT IMPOSED A SHIPPING CHARGE OF
ONE CENT.
SOME OF AMAZON'S OTHER BUSINESS
TACTICS HAVE ALSO PROMPTED
CRITICISM.
>> (translated): AS A CITIZEN,
I HAVE AN ISSUE WITH AMAZON
BECAUSE OF THE WAY IT OPTIMIZES
ITS TAXES.
THE MAJORITY OF ITS REVENUES ARE
DECLARED IN LUXEMBOURG.
>> Reporter: E.U. REGULATORS
RECENTLY ANNOUNCED THE DEAL
AMAZON STRUCK TO LOCATE ITS
EUROPEAN HEADQUARTERS IN
LUXEMBOURG MAY BE ILLEGAL, A
DEAL THAT'S MINIMIZED THE
COMPANY'S TAX BILL IN FRANCE AND
OTHER COUNTRIES BY MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS.
SEPARATELY, IN 2012, FRANCE
SLAPPED AMAZON WITH A $252
MILLION BILL FOR BACK TAXES.
RENNY AUPETIT SAYS, IF AMAZON'S
GOING TO SELL BOOKS IN FRANCE,
IT SHOULD PAY TAXES HERE, TOO,
AT THE SAME RATE HERE THAT HE
DOES.
>> (translated): EVERY TIME
YOU CHOOSE TO BUY A BOOK, YOU
CONTRIBUTE TO THE PLACE WHERE
YOU BUY IT.
SO, IF YOU BUY IT ON AMAZON, IT
MAKES AMAZON STRONGER.
BUT IF YOU WANT TO BUY A BOOK
FROM SOMEONE WHO CONTRIBUTES TO
THE ECONOMY OF ITS COUNTRY SO
THAT THERE ARE HOSPITALS, ROADS
AND SO ON, THEN YOU SHOULD BUY
IT FROM SOMEONE WHO PAYS ITS
TAXES IN FRANCE.
IT'S SIMPLE.
>> Reporter: A REPRESENTATIVE
FOR AMAZON TOLD NEWSHOUR THAT,
AS FOR THE FRENCH DEMAND FOR
BACK TAXES, "WE DISPUTE AND WILL
ALWAYS CONTEST THIS REQUEST" AND
"AMAZON PAYS ALL APPLICABLE
TAXES IN EVERY JURISDICTION IN
WHICH WE OPERATE AND ALWAYS
WILL."
BUT DOESN'T AMAZON HAVE A
POSITIVE ROLE TO PLAY?
I MEAN, PEOPLE ALL OVER THE
WORLD CAN BUY FRENCH BOOKS
THROUGH AMAZON.
>> (translated): WHEN AMAZON
ARRIVED, IT REVOLUTIONIZED THE
LOGISTICS OF THE BOOK BUSINESS,
AND I THINK THAT'S BEEN
BENEFICIAL.
BUT AS A CITIZEN, I HAVE A
PROBLEM WITH AMAZON.
IT DOESN'T BEHAVE WITH A SENSE
OF CIVIC SPIRIT, AND IN FRANCE
WE CARE ABOUT THIS.
>> Reporter: DESPITE AMAZON'S
PROBLEMS IN FRANCE, NOT EVERYONE
SEES IT AS ALL BAD.
AUTHOR PIERRE ASSOULINE'S MANY
BOOKS ARE SOLD ON AMAZON.
>> I KNOW, A LOT OF... A LOT OF
PEOPLE IN A FEW PLACES IN FRANCE
WHERE YOU DO NOT HAVE ANY
BOOKSTORES.
AND, THANKS TO AMAZON, THEY CAN
READ ALL THE BOOKS.
EVEN ME.
I HAVE, VERY OFTEN I... I HAVE
ORDERED BOOKS ON AMAZON.
THE IDEAL WORLD, IT WOULD BE A
WORLD WHERE YOU HAVE AMAZON AND
THE BOOKSTORES, LIKE IN FRANCE
TODAY.
>> Reporter: AND BERNARD
TERRADES, WHO OWNS A USED BOOK
STORE IN PARIS' LATIN QUARTER,
SAYS SELLING BOOKS ON AMAZON HAS
HELPED HIM GAIN MORE CUSTOMERS.
>> (translated): IT'S HAD THE
BENEFIT OF INCREASING OUR
POPULARITY A LITTLE.
MANY PEOPLE HAVE DISCOVERED US
THANKS TO THE INTERNET.
SO, IT'S NOT ALL NEGATIVE.
THERE ARE ALSO POSITIVES.
I HAVE CUSTOMERS WHO LIVE FAR
AWAY WHO HAVE MET ME ONLINE, AND
THEY NOW COME TO SEE ME WHENEVER
THEY COME TO PARIS.
>> Reporter: EVEN STILL,
TERRADES SAYS HIS FEELINGS ARE
MIXED BECAUSE HE FEELS HE DIDN'T
REALLY HAVE A CHOICE.
HE SAYS HE HAD TO SELL ON A BIG
SITE LIKE AMAZON BECAUSE THERE
WAS NO WAY HE COULD COMPETE WITH
A WEB SITE OF HIS OWN.
>> (translated): I WILL SHOW
UP ON THE 20th PAGE OF SEARCH
RESULTS.
NOBODY WILL EVER COME TO MY
SITE, SO IT'S MISSION
IMPOSSIBLE.
I DON'T HAVE AMAZON'S MONEY TO
ACHIEVE THIS, SO I DON'T HAVE A
CHOICE.
I HAVE TO BE HOSTED BY THEM.
THE SYSTEM IS NOT FAIR.
IT'S JUST BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: BACK IN EAST PARIS,
RENNY AUPETIT HAS MADE IT HIS
MISSION TO HELP BRICK-AND-MORTAR
BOOKSELLERS COMPETE ONLINE.
FIVE YEARS AGO, HE LAUNCHED A
WEB SITE, lalibrairie.com, OR
"THE BOOKSTORE DOT-COM."
IT'S A UNION OF ABOUT 1,800
BOOKSELLERS ACROSS FRANCE THAT
ALL SELL THEIR BOOKS ON ONE
SITE.
BUT THERE'S A CATCH: CUSTOMERS
ORDER BOOKS ONLINE BUT MUST GO
TO THEIR LOCAL BOOKSTORE TO PICK
THEM UP.
AND THAT, AUPETIT SAYS, IS WHERE
CUSTOMERS WILL FIND AN
EXPERIENCE THEY COULD NEVER FIND
ONLINE.
>> (translated): WE'VE NOTICED
WHEN PEOPLE MAKE AN ONLINE
PURCHASE, THEY STAY AN AVERAGE
OF TWO MINUTES ON THE SITE,
WHILE, WHEN PEOPLE COME IN A
BOOKSTORE, THEY STAY ONE HOUR,
TWO HOURS OR LONGER.
WE HAVE ARMCHAIRS, COUCHES.
THE BOOKSTORE IS A PLACE WHERE
PEOPLE COME AND WANDER, GET
SUGGESTIONS, TALK ABOUT BOOKS.
IT'S NOT A PLACE WHERE YOU COME
WITH A VERY DEFINED IDEA OF WHAT
YOU WANT.
SO, IT'S A CULTURAL VENUE IN A
WAY.
THE CONCEPT I'M DEFENDING IS,
YOU CAN USE MODERN COMMUNICATION
TOOLS, BUT IF EVERYTHING IS
ORDERED FROM YOUR HOME AND
DELIVERED AT YOUR HOME AND
NOBODY TALKS TO EACH OTHER
ANYMORE, THAT'S NOT A SOCIETY I
WANT TO LIVE IN.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN MORE ABOUT
HOW THE WORLD READS, INCLUDING
HOW E-READERS ARE AFFECTING
GLOBAL READING HABITS.
SEE OUR INFOGRAPHIC ON FACEBOOK.
VISIT facebook.com/newshour.
A GOVERNMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
MADE A SERIES OF RECOMMENDATIONS
THURSDAY ABOUT WHAT AMERICANS
SHOULD AND SHOULDN'T EAT AND
DRINK.
THE GROUP'S FINDINGS WILL HELP
SHAPE THE OFFICIAL GUIDELINES
BEING DRAWN BY THE DEPARTMENTS
OF AGRICULTURE AND HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES.
FOR MORE ABOUT THIS, WE ARE
JOINED NOW FROM BOSTON BY ALICE
LICHTENSTEIN.
SHE'S A PROFESSOR OF NUTRITION
SCIENCE AND POLICY AT TUFTS
UNIVERSITY AND HELPED DRAFT THE
GUIDELINES.
SO, I KNOW IT WAS A 500-PLUS-
PAGE REPORT, BUT, IN BROAD
STROKES, WHAT WERE THE MAJOR
AREAS OF FOCUS IN THIS REPORT?
>> WELL, THE MAJOR AREA OF FOCUS
WAS THAT WE SHOULD REALLY BE
THINKING ABOUT THE WHOLE DIET, A
DIETARY PATTERN, AND NOT JUST
INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS, BECAUSE
WE KNOW WHEN ONE COMPONENT OF
THE DIET GOES UP, ANOTHER
COMPONENT OF THE DIET GOES DOWN.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, HOW
DIFFERENT IS THAT FROM THE
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT CAME OUT,
SAY, FIVE YEARS AGO?
>> THEY'RE SUBTLE TWEAKS.
WELL, FIRST OF ALL, THESE AREN'T
RECOMMENDATIONS.
REMEMBER, THIS IS JUST A SUMMARY
OF AN EVIDENCE, A REPORT.
AND I WOULD SAY SOME OF THE
DIFFERENCES ARE THAT WE PUT LESS
EMPHASIS ON RESTRICTING DIETARY
CHOLESTEROL BECAUSE THE EVIDENCE
DIDN'T SUPPORT IT.
WE ADDRESSED ISSUES RELATED TO
SODIUM, WHICH HAS BEEN QUITE
CONTROVERSIAL, INDICATING THAT
THE IMPORTANT THING TO FOCUS ON
IS REDUCING SODIUM INTAKE.
WE RECOMMENDED PUTTING A LIMIT
ON THE AMOUNT OF ADDED SUGAR
THAT ANYONE CONSUMES AT ONE
TIME.
AND THEN, ALSO ADDRESSED ISSUES
RELATED TO COFFEE, INDICATING
THAT COFFEE CONSUMPTION PER SE
DOES NOT HAVE ADVERSE EFFECTS.
IT MAY ACTUALLY HAVE BENEFICIAL
EFFECTS, ALTHOUGH YOU HAVE TO BE
CONCERNED ABOUT THE AMOUNT OF
CREAM AND SUGAR THAT'S ADDED.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU'VE ALSO
ALREADY GOTTEN PUSHBACK FROM THE
BEEF INDUSTRY AND POSSIBLY THE
SUGAR LOBBY, THE BEVERAGE
INDUSTRY, BECAUSE THIS IS ONE OF
THE FIRST TIMES THAT I REMEMBER
WHEN YOU'RE ACTUALLY SAYING
CONSUME LESS OF SOMETHING, LIKE
LESS RED MEAT.
>> IN TERMS OF THE RED MEAT FROM
THE MEAT INDUSTRY, I THINK THERE
IS SOMEWHAT OF A
MISUNDERSTANDING.
WE DO SAY DIETS HIGH IN RED AND
PROCESSED MEATS ARE ASSOCIATED
WITH INCREASED ADVERSE HEALTH
OUTCOMES.
HOWEVER, WE ALSO CLEARLY STATE
THAT CONSUMING A LIMITED AMOUNT
OF LEAN RED MEAT IS... CAN FIT
INTO A HEALTHY DIETARY PATTERN.
>> Sreenivasan: AND YOU'VE ALSO
ADDED A SUSTAINABILITY COMPONENT
TO THIS, SAYING THAT CERTAIN
FOODS LIKE PLANT-BASED FOODS ARE
MORE SUSTAINABLE AND PERHAPS WE
SHOULD CHOOSE IN THAT DIRECTION.
AND THAT'S GOTTEN SOME PUSHBACK
FROM FOLKS SAYING, "YOU KNOW
WHAT?
THAT'S A POLITICAL AND AN
IDEOLOGICAL DISTINCTION.
IT HAS NO BEARING ON WHAT TYPE
OF FOOD WE SHOULD BE EATING."
>> WELL, I THINK THERE'S MORE
NUANCE THERE, THAT IF THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT MAKES CERTAIN
RECOMMENDATIONS ABOUT EATING
MORE OF SOMETHING, THEN WE HAVE
TO MAKE SURE THAT IT'S GOING TO
BE AVAILABLE AND THAT THERE'S
NOT GOING TO BE ANY ADVERSE
EFFECT ON THE ENVIRONMENT.
AND I THINK WE SAW THAT WITH
FISH.
WHEN WE... THERE WAS A
RECOMMENDATION QUITE A FEW YEARS
AGO TO INCREASE FISH
CONSUMPTION.
THERE WAS A LOT OF CONCERN ABOUT
DEPLETING THE STOCKS OF WILD-
CAUGHT FISH, SO THE INDUSTRY
REALLY STEPPED IN AND DEVELOPED
SOME VERY SUSTAINABLE AND
ENVIRONMENTALLY RESPONSIBLE WAYS
OF FARMING FISH.
AND I THINK WE CAN USE THAT AS A
MODEL FOR SOME OF THE OTHER
CONCERNS THAT HAVE BEEN RAISED.
I DON'T THINK IT SHOULD BE
VIEWED NECESSARILY AS NEGATIVE
OR TRYING TO IMPEDE ANY ONE
INDUSTRY.
I THINK WE SHOULD VIEW IT AS AN
OPPORTUNITY TO BE CREATIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, HELP ME
UNDERSTAND HOW THIS REPORT
IMPACTS THE BUDGET DECISIONS
THAT ARE MADE ON, SAY, SCHOOL
LUNCHES OR NUTRITION PROGRAMS.
>> ACCORDING TO THE FEDERAL
LEGISLATION, ANY FEEDING PROGRAM
THAT IS SUPPORTED BY FEDERAL
DOLLARS HAS TO ADHERE TO THE
DIETARY GUIDELINES.
SO, IF THE DIETARY GUIDELINES
THAT ARE GOING TO COME OUT AT
THE END OF THIS YEAR INDICATE
THAT LESS THAN 10% OF CALORIES
SHOULD COME FROM SUGAR, THAT
MEANS FEEDING PROGRAMS, WHETHER
IT BE IN MILITARY OR THE SCHOOL
LUNCH, WOULD HAVE TO LIMIT THE
AMOUNT OF SUGAR THAT'S ACTUALLY
IN THOSE MEALS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, ALICE
LICHTENSTEIN, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
YOUR TIME.
>> YOU'RE VERY WELCOME.
THANKS FOR THE OPPORTUNITY TO
COMMENT.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
"VIEWERS LIKE YOU," YOUR CHANCE
TO COMMENT ON OUR WORK.
TONIGHT, YOUR LARGELY ONE-SIDED
RESPONSES TO LAST SATURDAY'S
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
IN IT, WE REPORTED ON THE STATE
OF NEBRASKA SUING THE STATE OF
COLORADO OVER THE LEGALIZATION
OF MARIJUANA, AND HOW THAT HAS
INCREASED THE COSTS OF LAW
ENFORCEMENT IN THE CORNHUSKER
STATE.
THERE WAS THIS FROM READMORE:
"THESE STATES NEED TO STOP
WHINING AND MOVE INTO THE 21st
CENTURY WITH THE REST OF US.
'HAVE SUFFERED DIRECT AND
SIGNIFICANT HARM ARISING FROM
THE INCREASED PRESENCE OF
COLORADO-SOURCED MARIJUANA.'
LMAO!
RIGHT."
AND THIS FROM LORELEI LEE87:
"WHILE I AGREE THAT MARIJUANA
SHOULD BE LEGAL IN ALL 50
STATES, I HAVE TO SAY THAT THOSE
PEOPLE TRYING TO TRANSPORT IT
FROM COLORADO ARE NOT THE
BRIGHTEST BULBS.
OF COURSE THEY'RE WATCHING THE
BORDER.
YOU SHOULD HAVE REALIZED THAT
THE MOMENT IT BECAME LEGAL
THERE."
MIKEPARENT COMMENTED ON THE
LOCAL POLICE AUTHORITY: "IT'S
HIS CHOICE TO RAMP UP
ENFORCEMENT, THEN HE COMPLAINS
ABOUT INCREASED WORKLOAD.
WE'D ALL BE BETTER OFF IF THE
POLICE WOULD FOCUS ON CRIMES
THAT HAVE ACTUAL VICTIMS."
MIRKO SANSAN SAID, "REALLY?
JUST STOP FISHING FOR THE POT
WHEN YOU PULL PEOPLE OVER FOR
'SPEEDING.'"
AND FROM DAVESLC: "I FIND IT
HYPOCRITICAL THAT THESE SAME RED
STATES WHERE CONSERVATIVES
CONTINUALLY CLAMOR ABOUT STATES'
RIGHTS ARE NOW WANTING FEDERAL
INTERVENTION IN COLORADO."
ANTHONY J. COSTA ADDED, "ARE
THEY SEIZING AND CONFISCATING
THESE HARMLESS PEOPLE'S DORITOS,
TOO?"
JAVIER ALICEA NOTED: "IF IT'S
ILLEGAL IN YOUR STATE, DON'T
SMOKE POT.
WAIT TILL YOUR STATE LEGALIZES
IT."
AND THERE WAS THIS FROM BARBARA
REEDY: "GET OVER IT, NEBRASKA."
AND K.A. BERRY SAID SIMPLY: "NO
ONE SAW THIS COMING?"
AS ALWAYS, WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS AT pbs.org/newshour, ON
OUR FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET US
@NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
A STRIKE AT SOME OF THE NATION'S
OIL REFINERIES IS SPREADING.
WORKERS AT THE NATION'S LARGEST
REFINERY WALKED OFF THE JOB
EARLY TODAY IN TEXAS.
AND UNION LEADERS WARN THAT
STRIKES COULD BEGIN AT
REFINERIES IN LOUISIANA
TOMORROW.
NEGOTIATIONS OVER WAGES AND
BENEFITS AND SAFETY ISSUES HAVE
BOGGED DOWN.
AND FINALLY TONIGHT, WE'D LIKE
TO SAY THANK YOU AND BEST WISHES
TO A VALUED COLLEAGUE AND
FRIEND.
OUR DIRECTOR, WAYNE PALMER, IS
RETIRING AFTER TONIGHT'S
BROADCAST.
HE HAS EXCELLED DURING HIS 40-
PLUS YEARS IN PUBLIC TELEVISION.
WAYNE PALMER, A TOTAL PRO, A
GOOD MAN, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.